Problem Title : Real life solutions for Waste Management.

Problem Statement ID: 25060

Domain: Clean & Green Technology

Organization: Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment (MoSJE)

Category: Software

Background

In FY 2021–22, India generated approximately 1.7 lakh tonnes of municipal solid waste daily, of which only 54% was scientifically treated. Around 24% was dumped in landfills and 22% remained unaccounted due to leakages in the waste management chain. This unaccounted waste is often burned or disposed of in open areas, drains, or water bodies, posing severe environmental and public health risks. (CEEW, 2025) This calls for strict solutions to enable all the waste generators to contribute to Waste Management.

Description

Overview: According to the CPCB’s Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Annual Report for 2021-22, India generates approximately 1,70,339 tonnes of waste per day (TPD). Of this, around 1,56,449 TPD is collected. Out of the collected waste, 91,511 TPD is treated, while 41,455 TPD is disposed of in landfills. This leaves a significant gap of 37,373 TPD in effective waste management.
Waste treatment: The total waste processed/treated across the country is 91,511 TPD. When compared to the total waste generated, which is 1,70,339 TPD, it is found that an average of 54% of the waste is treated/processed across the country.
Solid Waste Processing Facilities: A total of 249 Waste-to-Energy plants, 819 Biomass Power plants and 50.8 lakhs small Biogas plants have been set up in the country to generate Power/Biogas/BioCNG.

Expected Solutions

The proposals aim to develop a strict system to ensure that every citizen is trained on waste management, waste workers get strict training and required safety gear, waste management facilities are present in every ULB/GP, and a dedicated decentralised monitoring system is in place. The solutions are as follows:

1. Mandatory training for every citizen: Similar to countries where military training is mandatory for every citizen, in India, there shall be mandatory Waste Management training for every Waste Generator/Citizen. This will ensure source segregation, which will result in better waste management, lesser load on waste management facilities and landfills.
  i. Physical training on types of waste, source segregation, how to make compost at home, re-use of plastic, etc.
  ii. Distribution of 3 types of dustbins for dry, wet and domestic hazardous waste to every household/citizen.
  iii. Distribution of a designed and tested compost making kit to every household/citizen.
  iv. App-based monitoring.
2. Phase-wise training to all Waste Workers
3. Formation of Area Committee for Monitoring – to be called as “Green Champions”: Decentralised approach for Monitoring has to be done at every step of Waste Management for bulk waste generators, residential areas, commercial & Public semi-public building, Industrial buildings, etc.
  i. Training of all Waste Generators
  ii. Waste Generation: Source segregation happening or not, no wet waste to be collected
  iii. Waste Collection happening on ground level
  iv. Waste transportation
  v. Waste treatment
  vi. Waste Disposal
4. Incentive based approach: Incentive to Bulk waste generators and other buildings for source segregation.
5. Waste Movements in ULBs: Taking example from Karnataka’s Yadgir city, “If you see waste, send photo” similar movement to be made mandatory for every ULB regardless of its size and population, to ensure community participation.
6. Community Participation: One day of all working staff regardless of employment type to be engaged in Cleaning of Public areas, waste management. Inspired from Cleaning-day followed in schools every week, every waste generator to be responsible for keeping the country clean and contributing to waste management, starting from Govt. sector.
7. Penalization system: Fines to be imposed and no waste collection for buildings not segregating waste at source as punishment.
8. Waste Management Facilities to be made available in every ULB:
  i. Biomethanization plant
  ii. W-to-E plant
  iii. Multiple Recycling centres for different types of waste
  iv. Scrap collection shops – Online app based
9. Complete Digital App-based system for:
  i. Training of all Waste Generators
  ii. Shopping of Waste utilities – compost kits, dustbins, etc.
  iii. Tracking of Waste collection vehicles
  iv. Location of Waste management facilities, Recycling centres, scrap shops etc.
  v. Option to upload geo-tagged photos of dumping sites, etc.